Fax +41 61 306 12 34
E-Mail karger@karger.ch
www.karger.com
 
Original Paper 
 
Brain Behav Evol 2008;71:15–31
 
DOI: 10.1159/000108608 
 
Early Diencephalon Development in 
 
Alligator 
 
Michael B. Pritz 
 
Department of Neurological Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine,  
Indianapolis, Ind. 
, USA 
noted further parcellation of the synencephalon into an an-
terior and posterior component, whereas others have not. 
Notwithstanding differe     nces as to whether the synencepha-
lon is a single unit or not, these detailed analyses in reptiles 
 
(Alligator) 
, birds (chick), and mammals (humans), suggest 
that the initial pattern of early diencephalon development 
in amniotes is similar.
 
 
Copyright © 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
Introduction
 
A number of approaches have been used to unravel the 
organization and evolution of the forebrain in vertebrates 
[Nieuwenhuys, 1998b]. Varying degrees of success have 
been achieved through an analysis of neuronal cell types 
and aggregates and their respective properties in a wide 
variety of adult animals [Nieuwenhuys, 1998b; Striedter, 
2005] usually selecting representative species in a given 
class. An alternative approach has been to analyze devel-
opment, with the hope that certain features might be un-
covered which would have remained obscure had only 
adult animals been examined [Puelles, 1995].
 
In analyzing the forebrain, the diencephalon was cho-
sen rather than the telencephalon because its properties 
in nearly every aspect are seemingly less complex than 
that of the telencephalon [Sherman and Guillery, 2006]. 
It is believed that the diencephalon shares common char-
acters in all vertebrates during early development and 
changes occur later in time which are specific for that 
group or species [Bergquist, 1952; Bergquist and Källén, 
1954; Rubenstein et al., 1994]. However, some researchers 
 
Key Words
 
Alligator mississipiensis 
  
! 
 Development  
! 
 Diencephalon  
! 
 
Evolution  
! 
 Forebrain  
! 
 Ontogeny  
! 
 Pretectum  
! 
 Reptiles
 
Abstract
 
Diencephalon development was investigated in a reptilian 
embryo,  
Alligator mississipiensis 
, beginning at a single com-
partment stage and continuing until internal subdivisions 
were present within major units. A variety of morphological 
techniques were used: immunocytochemistry, histochemis-
try, and cresyl violet staining. The diencephalon begins as a 
single unit. In the transverse domain, the diencephalon sub-
sequently divides into two: the parencephalon and the syn-
encephalon. The parencephalon then splits into the paren-
cephalon anterior and parencephalon posterior. Still later, 
the synencephalon undergoes parcellation into the synen-
cephalon anterior and synencephalon posterior. Subse-
quently, internal subdivisions occur in each of these four 
compartments. When the diencephalon has become subdi-
vided into two compartments and continuing until internal 
subdivisions are present in each unit, a longitudinal border 
separating a dorsal, presumed alar plate, from a ventral, pre-
sumed basal plate, was seen. No clear cut subunits were reli-
ably identified in the telencephalon or secondary prosen-
cephalon during this period of early development in  
Alligator. 
 
Early diencephalon development in birds (chick) and mam-
mals (humans) follows a similar pattern. Specifically, a single 
diencephalic compartment divides into two zones: the par-
encephalon and synencephalon. Subsequently, the paren-
cephalon becomes subdivided into an anterior and poste-
rior unit. Some studies, including the present one, have 
 
Received: December 19, 2006
 
Returned for revision: March 6, 2007
 
Accepted after revision: May 9, 2007
 
Published online: September 20, 2007 
 
M.B. Pritz
 
Department of Neurological Surgery
 
Indiana University School of Medicine, 545 Barnhill Drive, Emerson 141
 
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5124 (USA)
 
Tel. +1 317 274 5728, Fax. +1 317 274 7351, E-Mail mpritz@iupui.edu 
 
© 200  S. Karger AG, Basel
 
0006–8977/08/0711–0015$24.50/0 
 
Accessible online at:
 
www.karger.com/bbe 
7
 
Pritz
 
 
 
Brain Behav Evol 2008;71:15–31 
16
have questioned whether such a phylotypic stage exists 
for body plans in vertebrates [Richardson et al., 1997]. It 
remains to be seen whether or not such a phylotypic stage 
is present for developing vertebrate brains.
 
Most developmental studies have focused on just a few 
species [Richardson et al., 1997] concentrating on mouse 
as a representative mammal and chick as an example for 
birds. However, because mammals and birds diverged 
early in phylogeny [Kumar and Hedges, 1998; Benton, 
1999], using representatives solely from these two classes 
would not distinguish between similarities of the features 
in question based on inheritance from a common ances-
tor versus independent evolution of these traits [Pritz, 
2005].
 
Crocodilians are the reptilian group most closely re-
lated to birds [Whetstone and Martin, 1979; Hedges, 
1994]. As a representative of this order, the American al-
ligator,  
Alligator mississipiensis 
, was selected because it is 
relatively available and its developmental stages have 
been well characterized [Ferguson, 1985].
 
This report details early diencephalon development in 
 
Alligator 
 before overt compartmentalization begins and 
continues until the major histogenetic zones have be-
come internally subdivided. Morphological techniques 
that proved successful in analyzing early hindbrain de-
velopment in  
Alligator 
 [Pritz, 1999] were applied to the 
forebrain. These observations form the basis of this re-
port.
 
Two questions were addressed. First, what morpho-
logic features identify divisions of the diencephalon at 
early stages of development in  
Alligator 
? Second, how do 
these observations in  
Alligator 
 compare with early dien-
cephalon development in other vertebrates? Only by doc-
umenting that the organization of the  
Alligator 
 dienceph-
alon early in development is similar to that found in birds, 
mammals, and other vertebrates can later divergences in 
morphology be of potential biological significance. Spe-
cifically, it was hypothesized that early diencephalon de-
velopment in  
Alligator 
 would follow the pattern described 
for birds [Vaage, 1969; Puelles et al., 1987; Larsen et
al., 2001 – chick] and mammals [Müller and O’Rahilly, 
1997 – humans]. If so, changes occurring later in ontog-
eny could be identified as the key events that produced 
the adult diencephalon in  
Alligator 
 and perhaps other 
reptiles. These developmental events in  
Alligator 
 could 
then be compared with similar ontogenetic changes in 
diencephalon development in birds and mammals. 
Armed with these stage specific morphologic data, the 
molecular events responsible for these findings could be 
investigated.
 
The present analysis did not attempt to determine 
whether the observed diencephalic subdivisions repre-
sented and satisfied the developmentally significant cri-
teria enumerated by others [Keynes and Lumsden, 1990; 
Lumsden, 1990]. Similarly, these experiments did not in-
vestigate gene or transcription factor expression because 
it was first necessary to identify the individual units and 
their appearance during ontogeny before investigating 
other properties. Furthermore, unlike the hindbrain 
where rhombomeres can readily be seen even in un-
stained whole mount preparations [Pritz, 1999], identifi-
cation of transversal diencephalic subdivisions proved 
much more elusive.
 
Materials and Methods
 
Procedures and protocols listed below were reviewed and ap-
proved by the Indiana University School of Medicine animal care 
committee. These details conform to the National Institute of 
Health guidelines.
 
Animals
 
Alligator 
 eggs were obtained from the Rockefeller Wildlife 
Refuge in Grand Chenier, Louisiana. The location of the embryo 
was marked and the egg positioned with the embryo on top. Eggs 
were placed in a 2: 
  1 mixture of vermiculite and water in an incu-
bator at a temperature of 30 
  ° 
  C.
 
Embryos were sacrificed between stages 2 and 16 [Ferguson, 
1985]. Viable embryos were harvested by making an opening in 
the eggshell using fine scissors under magnification from an op-
erating microscope. A variety of fixatives were used for the vari-
ous morphological stains. However, best results for histochemical 
and immunocytochemical experiments were obtained with 100% 
methanol as the fixative in which embryos could be stored for 
many months at –70 
  ° 
  C. Embryos were first staged [Ferguson, 
1985] and then dissected free from surrounding tissues using a 
fine tungsten needle, microscissors, and jeweler’s forceps. Except 
at the earliest stages, brains were divided at the isthmus and the 
forebrain and midbrain were processed as a single unit.
 
In brains stored at –70 
  ° 
  C, best results for histochemistry and 
immunocytochemistry were achieved by gradual tissue re-warm-
ing: –20 
  ° 
  C (30–60 min); 4 
  ° 
  C (30–60 min); and then room tem-
perature ( 
6 
30 min) prior to embedding. Brains stained for cresyl 
violet were placed in a variety of fixatives: 10% formalin; 4% para-
formaldehyde; 4% glutaraldehyde; or Bouin’s solution (0.9% pic-
ric acid, 9% formaldehyde).
 
Tissue Processing
 
Embedding and sectioning of tissue processed for peanut ag-
glutinin histochemistry or immunocytochemistry was identical 
to the methods described previously [Pritz, 1999]. These tech-
niques are summarized briefly.
 
Brains were embedded in gelatin or albumin-gelatin. Blocks 
that were processed for histochemistry or immunocytochemistry 
were placed overnight in 30% sucrose in sodium phosphate buffer 
(PBS; 0.1  
M 
 at pH 7.2). At least 4h before sectioning, blocks were 
